So we all, we are definitely aiming to be out of here
by five engaged.
Hate to leave you dip. Deputy speaker sitting,
waiting for Michelle Pike
To chair And our
ministry people.
Are they, oh, they're there. I bring them in.
Sorry, I thought someone's gone out to get them.
Michelle's with you. This is Chad.
She might to unmute our camera here.
Right? We've,
well, we've got you there.
Um, Michelle Pike.
We're just waiting for getting our officials into the room
so they can hear your presentation.
Good afternoon. A afternoon again,
right?
Let's bring, we've got, our submitter is coming in via Zoom.
Just,
Um, need to ask her.
Oh, right now, could you turn your camera on there please?
She, if you've got it.
Oh, welcome. And your,
The audio.
Look, we're all there. Plans come together.
Technology And you,
and you've even got your name across on your t-shirts in
case we, in case we forget
By introduction.
Alright, very good.
There's a reason for that. So I will begin.
Um, yes. Alright.
Good afternoon now. Greg oup, um, chair of the committee.
I'll just get a quick introduction
for the sake of those others in the room.
Uh, Greg Fleming, national Party MP for Monga, Kiki,
and Central Michelle.
I'm Paul Garcia, national MP for New Lynn.
K Kiara, Celia, Wade Brown, green List MP based in the
Ra. Woo
Whoop Elia.
Good. And we've got, uh, officials in the room as well.
So Michelle, 10 minutes.
We'll take your petition as read,
but of course you'd like to speak to and elaborate on that
and hopefully leave time.
Hopefully leave time for questions.
I would definitely like to leave time for questions.
Um, my t-shirt with my name on it.
This was actually my election shoot in 2013
to the nap city council.
And this was a very, um, the very year
that my life got turned upside down,
which relates to my petition.
I've been summoned for jury service four times in my
lifetime and I'm about to get my gold super card this year.
I was excused the first two times
because I was a breastfeeding mum.
The last two times I was challenged not for cause,
but for some unknown reason that you're never told.
How many committee members have received a summons jury
service, how many times, if so,
have you ever served on a jury or juries over time?
If so, again, were any of those juries,
hearing sexual violence cases?
To balance the context of this issue about the strangers
who serve as jurors, particularly on sexual violence trials,
have any of the committee members had first
or secondhand personal experiences
with victims of sexual violence?
It is an accepted undisputed fact globally
that the vast majority
of sexually violent defendant is not reported.
Therefore, when a complainant does get to a trial,
statistically they're one of the very few
who seek justice formally from those very few.
Only 50% in New Zealand will secure a guilty verdict
and 75% of rape trials are heard by a jury
of 12 so-called peers.
Mm-hmm. Versus the 25% heard by a judge alone.
Victims have no say whatsoever on who will hear their case,
a jury or a judge.
That exclusive right is for defendants to choose,
and it's not rocket science
that defendants will choose a jury over a judge of lying
because it gives them far better odds of an official.
Very recently, the government has raised the age
of jury excusal in order to expand the pool
of potential jurors, supposed supposedly
because the courts sometimes struggle to have enough people
to draw names from the ballot to serve.
All this does, in fact is give the oldest
citizens even more waiting.
So I believe it will further disadvantage victims
of sexual violence due to old fashioned biases.
The myths that wrongly frame victims are somehow to blame
for the crimes committed against them.
In my own failed trial, much was made about
what I was wearing while I slept in my own bed,
in my own home where I was raped a week
after my successful reelection to serve my city.
Another unique myth that was pitched at me,
which I'm sure committee members will relate to, is
that I was lying because in quotes,
all politicians are liar.
Those who are just, those are just two examples of the myths
that I had to endure in front of the jury of 1210
of your home were men.
The petition you're considering today is the result
of my own deep dive into the issue of just
who makes up jury panels, the demographics after many oia
and alongside the publicly available data on sexual violence
offending, I approached the Ministry
of Justice about conducting this specific research
after getting a complete runaround for two years.
I might add, I lodged this petition on the last sitting day
of the last government.
In utter frustration, I've only asked that the age, gender,
and ethnicity of jurors be collated.
Those three data points are the same as collected
by every government
or community organization in their everyday functions.
The report to the committee says there might be budget
consideration in satisfying my request.
That's a very lame excuse to prevent this proceeding.
In reality. Every week in the courts registrars record the
basic B lists of who are chosen as jurors.
None of it identifying jurors in any public sense.
Asking jurors to fill out a very basic form is not an
onerous imposition on jurors or registrars.
Recording the ages, genders,
and ethnicities of jurors will be the most fundamental way
of seeing who serves this function.
My petition seeks to put that foundation in place
beyond my petition's request.
What I want to do is far more in depth research
of the people who have served already on sexual violence
trials in particular, inquiring about their influences,
their experiences, and their biases.
I do not want jurors identified in any way.
I do want to know what influences them,
especially in the context
of our online digital experiences and exposures.
Much of it, a toxic mix of victim blaming misogyny
and outright trolls.
To end, I put the question to the committee
as I did in my petition papers,
how can we have any competence that jury p panels are fair,
reasonable, impartial, and representative?
The answer is, we can't.
And from the data that I have sourced all via oia,
as you will have received this diagram,
this ven diagram here, uh, that diagram there,
it took me an a year of basically drilling down just to get
that it paints a pretty abysmal picture of
how many summons is it sent out, how many people
actually respond, how many ignore it?
And the most shocking evidence of all that I found,
the question was answered.
I said, how many people have faced a penalty
for ignoring their summons?
And it came back as over a 10 year period twice.
And we don't know why, because of course
that's dependent on the judge in the court at the time.
Um, so when people get their summons,
of course the threat is implied at the end.
If you ignore it, there'll be penalties.
When an actual fact it's got no teeth, it means nothing.
And most people will be horrified to, to learn that
because we do rely on ordinary citizens fronting up
to do their democratic, um, service via juries.
My bigger question though is on in particular about, um,
sexual violence trials.
The people that sit on these
that make these decisions in three quarters of these trials.
Um, yes, it's based on my own experience,
but as I've said prior via my paperwork,
I've got a broad history prior to that.
This has been my third sexual violence
assault in my lifetime.
It's the only time I reported it.
And in many, many ways I wish I hadn't.
I just wish I hadn't.
I got put through the mill
and it actually destroyed me to the point
where I carried on with my term.
But where I had to have a safety plan, I had
to be very careful out in public
and I had to hide in plain sight.
So the 2020, uh, 2016 election, my reelection
after this t-shirt, I was hampered.
I couldn't put out any hoardings.
I couldn't even do my t-shirts
because of the requirement to have my address on it.
So without any advertising whatsoever, no hoardings,
I only missed out by 124 votes.
If I'd put one hoarding up,
I possibly would've been reelected.
In fact, I'm sure I would've been.
I know that that has now changed
and I applaud the government on that change too late for me.
Good for future potential politicians.
Um, so as, as I leave that point,
my broad history and community, I've worked in all manner
of, of advocacy roles in the public for many,
many people on both sides of the court.
I might head, I've, I've supported defendants,
I have supported complainants,
and then I became a complainant myself.
So on that note, the rest of the time I leave
for any questions, particularly any of the ones I asked
of you, committee of your committee members
and your experiences. Thank you.
Alright, thank you Michelle.
And, uh, thank you for your, um, your, your
outline circumstances, um, which is very,
uh, not easy to do. I'm sure
My lemonade out of all the lemons
Certainly, um, gives context to your,
um, submissions.
Yeah. Um, Wade Brown,
Kira, and, um, from a former local body
politician to another.
Yeah. Um, greetings
and I'm sorry to hear of your experience.
Um, I have been called up as a counselor.
I served once, um, I stood up
and was not chosen for whatever reason.
Once, um, I've actually been on the other side also as a,
you know, when in a, in a case in a jury trial,
which was really interesting.
But I was excused as mayor
and of course now I'm not eligible.
So little, little bit of experience though,
not on any sexual violence cases.
Yeah. Thank um,
but I did have a question about the recording of gender
and I presume you would be, um,
content if it was along the lines of male, female,
non-binary and prefer not to say, which is sort of normal
four options, full range, like that
Full range self-identifying by the, by anyone
who actually answers the question.
Sure. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, the question I was gonna ask is
that ultimately once we've got this information, um,
would certainly be useful.
Could you see how it would be used
because the logical next step would be then
prescribing a makeup of a jury.
Is that where you would see it ending up going because to
otherwise, how else would it be useful then?
Um, I, I think more, it's more on the academic side
and the social side of it.
I'm not, I'm, there is no way I'm saying prescribe
who should sit on a jury.
That is not a, it really is the research exercise
of looking at who does.
Um, and those three data things, I mean, like I said,
every government department,
every organization I've ever worked with asks
for those three things for various reasons.
A lot of the community groups, of course, it's
to satisfy government contracts, you need to know who,
who your client base is.
For my purpose, it's literally digging into the,
the soc the sociology of it all if you like.
Um, what I would like to do actually is a far bigger survey
of past jurors of sexual violence trials
and it really is to dig into what the biases are,
what their influences are.
Um, so I see it more academically rather than demanding
that something changes in how we choose a jury.
I just think it's a point of note for all concerned.
I know some of that work has been done.
I do a criminology paper where there was, uh, yeah,
that had been done by, done by, um, Victoria University,
but we might hear about that.
Alright, look, thank you very much.
Um, very good presentation and, um, yeah, it's, uh, it's
Just thank one And,
and again, thank you for your courage to give in context,
Thank you to Your, um, to your petition
and the rationale.
So thank you very much. Thank you. Thank right.
So the Ministry of Justice.
Welcome.
Thank you. Uh, so I'm Lisa Harris.
I'm the manager of the victims of harm reduction team in the
criminal justice unit and policy
group at the Ministry of Justice.
Um, and I'm Karen McCarran, chief Legal, uh,
and policy advisor in the Office of the Chief Justice,
who also in this context is the secretary
for the Judicial Research Committee.
Oh, good old. Great. You're both together, so, alright.
Who's take it away.
Uh, how would you like us to proceed?
Shall which shall we take it?
Shall we just take questions on, on the advice?
Well just give us a, a broad, you know, particularly in,
you had the context there, just as sort of gives us a,
a good broad, you know, context for your own submission
and certainly maybe just summarize
and then we can sort of go to questions and discussion from
There, I guess. Yeah. And
first, absolutely want to acknowledge Ms.
Pike's, um, own experiences,
but also the commitment to using those experiences to to,
to bring change for survivors
that follow behind her as well.
Um, I guess in terms of the specific
question in the petition, which is that the Ministry
of Justice collects this additional data on juries, um,
to broadly summarize the various submissions we've made
that the data isn't necessary for the, um,
efficient administration of the jury system.
Uh, if we were to, um, through the course
of policy work decide that the,
that information would be useful to support policy analysis
and decisions, then we would work with the ju judiciary
to establish a process for the purposes of collecting it.
Um, similarly, um, for external researchers,
there's a process go of going through the judicial, uh,
research committee to establish, uh, a process
for collecting the data and,
and uh, uh, developing a research project.
I, I, I guess the question I did ask, um, Ms.
PRI Pike was pi Pi what for what purpose?
And you, and unless it was going to inform you,
change the make of a jury
or, um, prescribe it, it's difficult.
Although saying that, I mean, studies have been done,
you'll be well aware of 'em.
Um, I, so Victoria Univers that
and there have been numerous jury studies
where people have gone back usually after one.
So they have, they, you'd have
to admit they've been pretty useful as to how the jury's,
um, my, my memory is that the selection
of the foreperson foreman four woman tends to be
as influential part of a lot of the decision
that sets the tone as much as anything else. Mm-hmm. Has
That research led to, to any change though?
Well, it's just hard to think what changed 'cause
because it's, again, having a background in police,
it's the, it's the defense
and the challenges that really shapes the jury.
Mm. I mean it's uh, in fact, just remind me, so
the defense get how many challenges in
and the prosecution get?
How many in a typical,
It's an excellent question that I meant to study
before I came to this meeting.
Um, I don't have it to hand,
but I can provide you that information.
Yeah. That would be useful for us.
Does any I I, yeah, it's quite a knock.
We've got a lawyer here. I mean, I know it's quite,
the defense get a lot more than the prosecution.
Mm. Don't they? I think it six and 12. Six seven.
I, I won't commit without having looked at them.
We usually have that information.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. We can do that.
And you're absolutely right that, I mean the, the selection
of the jury is a random process, um, in terms of the ballot,
um, that is drawn from the information
that we collect from the electoral commission.
And then that then, um, is, uh, balloted again,
which ru brings it to the smaller number who are summoned.
And then as the, the prosecution
and the defense are then able
to challenge certain numbers for
The case that, um, we heard about, you know, from Celia
where she went and wasn't selected,
would there ever be a record of the fact that she went
and wasn't selected before you, obviously,
before you were the mayor, and,
Um, as to where the individual person was, um, selected
and not, uh, was summons
but not selected? I dunno the answer
To that question because what I'm think that, I mean,
that data would be useful, wouldn't it?
I mean, it would be to see who is, if for no other reason,
because everyone has a theory about what happens.
Mm-hmm. There's nothing like having some facts, so, well,
that's actually not true.
It is not, um, men of my demographic
that are chosen or rejected.
Um, you know,
and my experience is
that female lawyers choose differently than male lawyers.
Um, a male lawyer will want a different sort of,
often want a different type of a and often counterintuitive.
That's again, from, from having sat in courtrooms,
watching juries being selected
and knowing as the opposite charge of the case,
how important the jury selection was.
Mm-hmm. So, um, yeah, it would be, so
how difficult would it be then to gather this information?
'cause I mean, you go and it's, I mean, we are
where digital beasts now, aren't we? We are, we are. This,
Yeah. Can I just do on
that one? So when nominated,
guess probably like us all, I've been summed a couple
of times and in fact neither time have I chosen.
Um, but in order to be able to, uh, um,
summon me or invite me to be there,
they obviously have my details.
So, um, they, they, we do collect from,
from the electoral commission, from the electoral role
that the date of birth, the oc uh, the occupation,
the address details and the contact details, right.
So there's a, there's an arrangement between the ministry
and the electoral commission to collect that detail so
that we can contact potential jurors.
So the electoral, but on the electoral role, there is a,
that's got my gender and age, doesn't it? No.
Is it Not? No, no.
So we would need, so it wouldn't be a matter simply
expanding the contract with the electoral, uh,
arrangement with the electoral commission.
We would need to establish a different
way of collecting that data.
But is that, is that gender on the electoral role?
No, that's what they're saying. It's not,
and your ethnicity isn't done
unless of course you're on Maori role.
Yes. Um, that's, that's interesting. So there
Would have to be a new different separate collection
system as you, as you,
Because I mean, for me, there's two questions.
One is, is, is, uh, we've, you know, spent most
of our discussion around, um, should it be done, so
what would be the benefits of it?
But it's keen to know could it be done
and Yeah, I mean it sounds like yes, it could be,
it would be more difficult than what I was, I was thinking.
Mm. In terms of the, should it be done, it's interesting.
One, I one stage
of my career had been involved in research and policy.
I mean, one of the things I've, you know, learned from
that is that, is that, that that very often,
and I would imagine that's what Michelle would, would say,
I think that's what I hear her say when she was saying it's
for academic research is, is um, not,
well pretty often the very best research is, is,
is not the research that, um, is um, is is brought about
to test a hypothesis.
Yes. Sometimes the very best research is simply just outta
curiosity, collecting data
and then you're surprised at what you find.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I mean I think, I think, I think,
I think it would be just thinking in terms of where we go
as a, as, as a committee would be interesting to recommend
that that kind of data collection be, be considered.
I think it, and it sounds like it could be done. Mm-hmm.
So Just briefly, it does appear
that some jurisdictions do collect that kind of juror data.
Um, I don't want to trust exactly what it says,
but, um, it, it is
collect some would be quite useful to know which um,
jurisdictions that are somewhat similar to us Yeah.
Actually do that and how they do that.
Whether it's, I mean
do you collect it when somebody says they're not going
to do it as well as when they actually do do it?
Um, because I think there's also an interesting issue about
who gets excused a hundred percent.
Who doesn't. Yeah. Um,
Yeah. And big
trials, well resourced trials.
The often the defense will get private investigators to go
through a jury list anyway and do this very stuff
because a lot of that data is open source.
Mm, that's right. I mean, we can all be found out.
I could probably find out how all work,
Well our IDI knows all that
how the IIDI works to be honest, we can
That For this
Ju juris do get bid. I mean even
The Still police used to the list of ju to be
John Smith. Yeah.
Ah, don't underrate some of these pi
that's the starting point.
Well look. So anyway, from, from our point of view members
questions is that it's not done.
There's no, there's no anticipation of doing it.
You're not aware where it, um, 'cause
'cause from a research point,
you know what's more than research, it's actually
'cause of, the biggest thing I can see is countering
accusations of, um, of
bias and the system.
But then the defense lawyers, as I say,
I've seen some pretty counterintuitive decisions made
and defense lawyers the old days of thinking, you turn up
as a juror and have your RSA badge on,
that'll guarantee you'll never get on jury.
There were a lot of lawyers said, I know
I, I want that person.
You know, so it's um, so individualized.
So it'd be very, so the po if, okay, one last question.
If this were to be done mm-hmm.
It would need to be done at the point to do it would be
where, as Greg said, you,
you turn up on the day and you record it.
Do you mind filling this form in?
I think for the specific research question that Ms.
Pike is looking at, it would be at the point you were, um,
you were became a jury member on panel panel.
So yeah, uh, it would be a, a matter of, of recording
the panel that you were on as well as the,
the particular characteristics of the individual juror
and how that then relates to the,
I guess so although knowing he
wasn't selected is probably,
But who was summoned and who got excuse, I think he think
All of that Interest, you know, the step before that,
before they actually appear if they get an excuse.
Is that demographically
Fair? Well, well we can
discuss that.
I think the main thing here members is
that it's not done no, no plan to do it.
Um, and so where, where and when we would do it,
but it's, I'm sure under modern collection
device, it wouldn't be that difficult.
But anyway, thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you
So much. Yeah. Very much
to the clerk about your additional, uh,
request for information.
Thank you.